---
layout: post
comments: true
title:  "TEST DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT - A Beginner's guide"
date:   2015-11-11 13:33:41 +1100
categories: Main category
markdown_ext: "markdown, mkdown, mkdn, mkd, md"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images: 
  - url: /assets/img/tdd.png
    alt: Test Driven Development illustration
    title: Test Driven Development illustration

  - url: /assets/img/tdd_hello_world_1.gif
    alt: Test Driven Development Hello world example
    title: Test Driven Development Hello world example

permalink: test-driven-development
 
---
<div class="center">
{% assign image = page.images[0] %}
{% include image.html image=image %}
</div>

## So what is TDD?

Can you actually write a test before writing a single line of implemetion logic? How do you know what method, class, or interface will contain the method under test? Sounds a bit odd...
That's exactly how I felt when I first read about TDD. 
<!--more-->

> Test-driven development (TDD) is a software development process that relies on the repetition of a very short development cycle: requirements are turned into very specific test cases, then the software is improved to pass the new tests, only. 
>
>--- [Test-driven development. (2016, November 20). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 23:45, November 20, 2016](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Test-driven_development&oldid=750634597)

But once I got the hang of it I realised, that's the whole point! It guides you through the design.

TDD concept was introduced or developed by Kent Beck and in his book Test Driven Development: By Example he explains the pains of traditional development process and how adopting test driven development helps. And also the foundation and key concepts are explained with lots of code samples.

<hr>

## LETS TEST THE WATERS WITH A HELLO WORLD

<hr> 

All that is great! But how do you really apply TDD in ‘real word’ Java development?
Well, I started by applying it to a ‘hello world’. Too trivial, I know, but I like it to be as simple as possible.

##### 1 | Writting the test

<div>
{% assign image = page.images[1] %}
{% include image.html image=image %}
</div>

##### 2 | Writting the minimum code in order to pass the test

<div>
{% assign image = page.images[1] %}
{% include image.html image=image %}
</div>

##### 3 | Refactor the test and the code

<div>
{% assign image = page.images[1] %}
{% include image.html image=image %}
</div>

<hr>

## TOOLS, TECHNOLOGIES, AND FRAMEWORKS 

<hr> 

It's that simple. So what's keeping you from practicing TDD? Well, I guess it's not that simple when it comes to real world applications. 
Test driven development is a process, to follow the process we must be good at few things:

- Writting great unit tests
    + We'll discuss JUnit
- Mocking
    + There are a few mocking frameworks out there, but we'll discuss Mockito.
- TDD mindset
    + For this I suggest reading "Test Driven Development: By Example" by Kent Beck


